"Ozymandias" (Breaking Bad, Season 5, Episode 14)

Plot

Following the shootout at the desert compound, Walter White is forced to watch as Uncle Jack's gang
executes Hank Schrader in the desert, moments after Walt had attempted to buy Hank's life by
offering to surrender his entire remaining fortune. Jack's crew then digs up all but one barrel of
Walt's buried money, taking it as payment, and Jack allows Jesse Pinkman to live only after Walt
reveals, unprompted, that Jesse was responsible for the death of Gale Boetticher, information Jack's
nephew Todd uses to justify keeping Jesse alive as a prisoner to cook meth for the gang. Walt drags
Hank's body to a shallow grave with a backhoe he had rented under the pretense of digging up money
to move it, unaware Hank is already dead.

Walt returns home and tells Skyler that Hank has been killed, then instructs the family to pack for
an emergency departure, precipitating a physical struggle in the kitchen when Skyler attacks him
with a kitchen knife after learning what has happened to Hank. Walt Jr. intervenes and, in the
episode's most widely discussed scene, calls the police on his own father after witnessing the
fight, the first time in the series Walt Jr. is shown to fully turn against Walt. Walt flees with
baby Holly, briefly abducting her before leaving her at a fire station and calling Skyler to
anonymously confess to her, on a recorded line he knows the police are monitoring, that he alone was
responsible for everything, an attempt to clear Skyler of culpability before he goes on the run
using the identity broker known as "Saul's guy," Ed.

Production

The episode was written by Moira Walley-Beckett and directed by Rian Johnson, who had previously
directed several other high-profile Breaking Bad episodes including "Fifty-One" and the Season 3
episodes "Fly" and "Sunset". Bryan Cranston has cited the phone call scene between Walt and Skyler as
one of the most difficult scenes he performed in the series, noting in interviews that it required
him to play a version of Walt who was consciously performing anger for the benefit of the wiretap
while the character underneath was actually saying goodbye to his family.

Reception

"Ozymandias" is widely regarded by critics as one of the best episodes of the series and one of the
best episodes of television of the 2010s; it received a Writers Guild of America Award for Television:
Dramatic Series for Walley-Beckett's script. The title refers to the Percy Bysshe Shelley poem of the
same name, about the inevitable decay of empires and power, echoing the show's season-long theme of
Walt's empire collapsing.
